Kiki Camarena case
==================

The Kiki Camarena case is the 1985 abduction and murder in Mexico of U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration agent Enrique "Kiki" Camarena. Per John Kiriakou, the case is the origin of the 1985 U.S. statute under which the United States claims the authority to seize foreign nationals on foreign soil for prosecution at home. Kiriakou traces the modern U.S. practice of these extraterritorial "justice" operations to Camarena's 1985 kidnapping, torture, and murder in Guadalajara: a highly regarded DEA agent working against the Guadalajara Cartel, Camarena was outed as a DEA officer and kidnapped, held for 30 days, and tortured before cartel members drove a piece of rebar through the top of his head and dumped his body in a plastic bag on the side of the road.

Application to the 2026 Maduro operation

Kiriakou invokes the Camarena precedent in discussing the U.S. operation to seize Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro: "It's very bad form to just invade a country and snatch its leader and then kill 80 people and leave. It's very bad form. It's a violation of international law. It is not a violation of U.S. law. We've had a law in the United States since 1985 allowing us to do exactly that, thanks to the Kiki Camarena case. I wouldn't have done it. Maduro's not a nice guy, but this whole drug thing is grossly overstated. You want to invade a country, invade Mexico, that's where the problem is."

The killing that changed the law (Tegan Broadwater Pt 2)

John Kiriakou notes that the murder of DEA agent Kiki Camarena in Mexico led the Reagan administration to pursue legislation allowing U.S. law enforcement to kidnap suspects overseas and bring them back to trial. He considers it "entirely possible" that the CIA had a role in Camarena's death, given suspicions Camarena was onto the movement of Nicaraguan Contra arms, the history dramatized, he says, in the series Snowfall. In a more measured telling, Kiriakou says he never personally saw any evidence the CIA was involved in Camarena's murder, but that the agency "certainly exploited" it: Reagan took the killing personally, and it was the first time a president had signed executive orders authorizing cross-border law-enforcement actions, orders that also opened the door for the CIA to operate across borders.

Under the resulting 1985 law, U.S. special forces crossed into Mexico and kidnapped the cartel members responsible for Camarena's murder, including the doctor who had kept him alive to be tortured further. The doctor was acquitted at trial; the others were convicted and sentenced to life without parole. The convicted Mexican defendants appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which upheld the law as legally passed. Kiriakou notes the Trump administration cited the same law, and Maduro's New York indictment for crimes against Americans, to justify the 2026 operation that captured him.

See also

- John Kiriakou
